Investigation of ConditionsNo thing anywhere is ever born from itself, from something else,
from both or without a cause.

There are four conditions: Causes, objects, immediate and dominant. There is no fifth.

The essence of things does not exist in conditions and so on. If an own thing does not exist,
an other thing does not exist.

There is no activity which has conditions. There is no activity which does not have conditions.
There are no conditions which do not have activity, and none which do have activity.

Since something is born in dependence upon them, then they are known as “conditions”. As long
as it is not born, why are they not non-conditions?

It is impossible for something that either exists or not to have conditions. If it were non-existent,
of what would they be the conditions? If it were existent, why would it need conditions?

When things cannot be established as either existent, non-existent or both, how can one speak
of an “establishing cause.” Such would be impossible.

An existent phenomenon is clearly said to have no object at all. If the phenomenon has no object,
where can the object exist?

If phenomena are not born, it is invalid for there to be cessation. Therefore, an immediate
[condition] is unreasonable. What, having ceased, can also be a condition?

Because the existence of essence-less things does not exist, it is incorrect to say:“When this
exists, that arises.”

There is no effect at all in the conditions individually or together. How can that which is
not in the conditions itself be born from conditions?

If, although the effect is not there, it is born from those conditions, why is an effect not
born from what are not its conditions?

Effects [are of] the nature of conditions. Conditions do not have own nature. How can those
effects of what does not have own nature [be of] the nature of conditions?

Therefore, [it does] not have the nature of conditions, nor is there an effect with the nature
of non-conditions. Since there is no effect, what could [be its] non-conditions or conditions?

