Investigation of Birth, Abiding and PerishingIf birth were compounded, it would possess the
three characteristics [of a compound]. If birth were uncompounded, how would it be a characteristic
of a compound?

The three such as birth cannot individually be that which characterises compounds. How is it
possible for one at one time to be compounded [of all three]?

If birth, abiding and perishing had an other characteristic of being compounded, this would
be endless. If not, they would not be compounded.

The birth of birth gives birth to the root birth alone. The root birth also is that which gives
birth to the birth of birth.

If your birth of birth gives birth to the root birth, how does that which is not yet born from
your root give birth to that [root birth]?

If that which is born from your root birth gives birth to the root, how does that root which
is born from that give birth to that [from which it is born]?

If that which has not been born is able to give birth to that, that of yours which is being
born should be able to give birth to that.

Just as lamplight illuminates itself and others, likewise birth too gives birth to both itself
and the thing of others.

Wherever lamplight is present there is no darkness. What does lamplight illuminate? It illuminates
by dispelling darkness.

If, when lamplight is being generated, it does not encounter darkness, how does the generation
of lamplight dispel darkness?

If darkness is dispelled even though it does not encounter lamplight, this [lamplight] dwelling
here would eliminate the darkness that dwells in all the worlds.

If lamplight illuminated itself and the thing of others, darkness too would without doubt obscure
itself and the thing of others.

How can unborn birth give birth to itself? If the born gives birth, when it has been born, what
would be born?

The born and the unborn, the being born do not in any way give birth. That has been explained
by the gone, not gone and going.

When being born does not arise in what is born, then how can one say “[it is] being born in
dependence on the born”?

Whatever is dependently arising, that is by nature pacified. Therefore, being born and what
is born too are pacified.

If any unborn thing existed anywhere, on being born that [unborn] thing would not exist. If
so, what would be born?

If that which has been born gives birth to what is being born, what [other thing] that has been
born would be giving birth to that which has been born?

If another [thing] that has been born gives birth [to it], this would be endless. If it is born
without [another] which has been born [OR if it is born without being born], everything
would be born like that [i.e. causelessly].

Thus it is not reasonable for what exists or does not exist to be born. It has been shown above
that there is no existent or non-existent.

It is not tenable for a thing that is perishing to be born. It is not tenable for that which
is not perishing to be a thing.

A thing that has remained does not remain. A thing that has not [yet] remained does not remain.
That which is remaining also does not remain. What unborn [thing] can remain?

It is not possible for a thing that is perishing to remain. It is not possible for that which
is not perishing to be a thing.

If all things at all times are aging and dying phenomena, what things are there which could
remain without aging and dying?

It is not reasonable for what remains to remain due to something else that remains or due to
itself. This is like how what has been born is not given birth to by itself or another.

What has ceased does not cease. What has not ceased also does not cease. Likewise what is ceasing
also does not. What unborn [thing] can cease?

It is not possible for a thing which has remained to cease. It is also not possible for a thing
which has not remained to cease.

A particular state [of something] does not cause that particular state itself to cease. Moreover,
another particular state does not cause that particular state to cease.

When the birth of all phenomena is not possible, then the cessation of all phenomena is not
possible.

Cessation is not possible in an existent thing. Thingness and nothingness are not possible in
one.

Cessation is not possible also in what is not a thing. This is similar to how there is no cutting
off a second head. [i.e. a person cannot be beheaded twice]

Cessation does not exist by its own self, nor does cessation [exist] by something else. This
is like how what has been born is not given birth to by itself or another

Because birth and remaining and perishing are not established, there is no conditioned. Because
the conditioned is utterly unestablished, how can the unconditioned be established?

Like a dream, like a magician’s illusion, like a city of gandharvas, likewise birth and likewise
remaining, likewise perishing are taught.

