Investigation of Act and ActorOne who exists as an actor does not do that which exists as an
act. One who does not exist as an actor also does not do that which does not exist as an
act.

One who exists has no activity; [something] would also exist as an act without an actor. One
who exists has no activity; [something] would also exist as an actor without an act.

If one who does not exist as an actor did that which does not exist as an act, the act would
have no cause; the actor too would have no cause.

If there were no cause, effect and cause would not be evident. If they were non-existent, activity
and agent and doing would not be evident.

If activity etc. did not appear, dharma and adharma would not be evident. If dharma and adharma
did not exist, there would be no fruit that comes from them.

If there were no fruit, the path of liberation and higher states would not be appropriate. Also
it would follow that all activities are meaningless.

One who exists and does not exist as an actor does not do what exists and does not exist [as
an act]. Since existence and non-existence are mutually contradictory in one [thing], where
can they exist?

One who exists as an actor does not do an act which is not existent. One who does not exist
[as an actor] also does not do what exists [as an act]. Here too faults will follow for one.

One who exists as an actor does not do what does not exist as an act and what neither exists
or not [as an act], because of what was demonstrated by the proof above.

One who does not exist as an actor does not do what exists as an act and what neither exists
or not [as an act], because of what was demonstrated by the proof above.

One who neither exists nor does not exist as an actor does not do that which exists and does
not exist as an act. Here too this is to be known through the proof demonstrated above.

An actor depends on acts and acts too occur in dependence on an actor. Apart from this, one
does not see a cause which is established.

Likewise, one should understand clinging, because act and actor are dispelled. Remaining things
too should be understood by means of actor and act.

