Investigation of Fire and FirewoodIf firewood were fire, actor and act would be one. If fire
were other than wood, it would occur even without wood.

[Fire] would burn permanently and would not arise from causes for burning. Starting [a fire]
would be meaningless. If it were like that, there would also be no act.

Because [fire] does not depend on anything else, it would not arise from causes for burning.
If it burned permanently, starting it would be meaningless.

Concerning this, if one thinks that while burning it is firewood, if it is such only at that
time, by what could that firewood be ignited?

Because [fire] is other, it would not connect; if it did not connect, it would not ignite; if
it did not ignite, it would not die; if it did not die, it would also remain in possession
of its own characteristic.

Just as a woman connects with a man and a man too with a woman, although fire is other than
wood, it is fit to connect with wood.

If fire and wood eliminated each other, even though fire is something other than wood, it would
have to connect with wood.

If fire were dependent on wood and wood were dependent on fire, of what becomes fire and wood
dependently, which would be established first?

If fire were dependent on wood, [already] established fire would be established [again]. Firewood
also would be [such] even without fire.

If a thing (A) is established dependently (on B), [but] if what it depends upon (B) is established
also in dependence on that very thing (A), what would be established in dependence
on what?

How can a thing (A) which is established dependently (on B) be dependent (on B) when it (A)
is not established? If one asks, “how can establishment be dependent?” It is not reasonable
for it (A) to be dependent.

There is no fire that is dependent on wood; there is also no fire that is not dependent on wood.
There is no wood that is dependent on fire; there is also no wood that is not dependent
on fire.

Fire does not come from something else; fire also does not exist in wood. Likewise, the remainder
of wood has been shown by gone, not-gone and going.

Wood itself is not fire; fire is also not something other than wood. Fire does not possess wood;
wood does not exist in fire; that (fire) does not exist in it.

Through fire and wood is explained without exception all the stages of self and the grasped
and at the same time jugs, cloth and so on.

I do not think those who teach the identity or difference of self and things are wise in the
meaning of the teaching.

