Restraining oneself well and loving thoughts that benefit others are the Dharma which is the
seed of fruits here and elsewhere.

The great sage has taught all actions to be intention and what is intended. The specifics of
those actions are well known to be of many kinds.

In this respect action spoken of as “intention” is regarded as being that of mind. That spoken
of as “what is intended” is regarded as being that of body and speech.

Whatever (1) speech and (2) movements and (3) “unconscious not-letting-go,” (4) other kinds
of unconscious letting-go are also regarded like that.

(5) Goodness that arises from enjoyment/use and in the same manner (6) what is not goodness,[and]
(7) intention. These seven dharmas are clearly regarded as action.

If the action remained until the time of ripening, it would become permanent. If it stopped,
by having stopped, how could a fruit be born?

The continuum of sprouts and so on clearly emerges from seeds, and from that fruits. If there
were no seeds, they too would not emerge.

Because continuums are from seedsand fruits emerge from continuums and seeds precede fruits,
therefore, there is no annihilation and no permanence.

The continuum of mind clearly emerges from mind, and from that fruits. If there were no mind,
they too would not emerge.

Because continuums are from minds and fruits emerge from continuums and actions precede fruits,
therefore, there is no annihilation and no permanence.

The ten paths of white action are the means of practising Dharma. Here and elsewhere, the fruits
of Dharma are the five kinds of sensual qualities.

If it were as that investigation, many great mistakes would occur. Therefore, that investigation
is not valid here.

I will fully declare the investigation which is taught by the Buddhas, Pratyekabuddhas and Sravakas,
which is valid here.

Just like a contract, irrevocable action is like a debt. In terms of realms, there are four
types. Moreover, its nature is unspecified.

It is not let go of by letting go, but only let go of by cultivation. Therefore through irrevocability
are the fruits of acts produced.

If it perished through being let go of by letting go and the transcendence of the action, then
faults would follow such as the perishing of actions.

The very [irrevocability] of all actions in similar or dissimilar realms, that one alone is
born when crossing the boundary [i.e. reborn].

In the visible world there are two kinds. Actions of all [types] and that [irrevocability] of
actions are produced as different things and remain [so?] even on ripening.

When the fruit is transcendent and when one dies, that ceases. One should know its divisions
to be without-corruption and with-corruption.

Emptiness is not annihilation and samsara is not permanent. The dharma of the irrevocability
of actions is taught by the Buddha.

Because actions are not born, in this way they have no nature. Therefore, because they are not
born, therefore they are irrevocable.

If actions existed [by] nature, without doubt they would be permanent. Actions would not be
done [by an agent] because what is permanent cannot be done.

If actions were not done [by anyone], one would fear meeting what [one] has not done. Also the
fault would follow for that [person] of not dwelling in the pure life.

All conventions also without doubt would be contradictory. Also the distinction between doing
good and evil would not be valid.

[When] the ripening of that [action] has ripened it would ripen again and again, because if
it existed [by] nature, it would [always] remain.

This action has the character of affliction and afflictions are not real. If affliction is not
real, how can action be real?

Actions and afflictions are taught to be the conditions for bodies. If actions and afflictions
are empty, how can one speak of bodies?

People who are obscured by ignorance, those with craving, are the consumers [of the fruits of
action]. They are not other than those who do the action and they are also not those very
ones.

Because the action does not emerge from conditions and does not emerge from non-conditions,
therefore, the agent too does not exist.

If neither the action nor the agent exists, where can there be a fruit of the action? If the
fruit does not exist, where can the consumer exist?

Just as a teacher creates a creation by a wealth of magical powers, and just as if that creation
too created, again another would be created,

Like this, whatever action too done by that agent [is ]also like the aspect of a creation. It
is just like, for example, a creation creating another creation.

Afflictions, actions and bodies and agents and fruits are like a city of gandharvas, a mirage,
a dream.

Investigation of Actions and Fruits

