If a fruit is born from the combination of cause and conditions and exists in the combination,
how can it be born from the combination itself?

If a fruit is born from the combination of cause and conditions and does not exist in the combination,
how can it be born from the combination itself?

If the fruit exists in the combination of cause and conditions, it would be correct for it to
be apprehendable in the combination but it is not apprehendable in the combination.

If the fruit does not exist in the combination of cause and conditions, the causes and conditions
would be comparable to non-causes and conditions.

If the cause stops once it has given the cause to the fruit, there would be a double nature
of the cause: one that gives and one that stops.

If the cause stops without having given the cause to the fruit, those fruits which are born
after the cause has stopped would be uncaused.

If the fruit were also born at the same time as the combination, it would follow that the producer
and the produced would be simultaneous.

If the fruit were born prior to the combination, there would occur an uncaused fruit which has
no cause and conditions.

If [when] a cause stops, it is forever transferred to the fruit, then it would follow that the
cause which was born before would be born again.

How can the production of fruit be produced by the stopping and disappearing [of something]?
Also how can fruit be produced by related causes which persist with it?

If cause and fruit are not related, what fruit can be produced? Causes do not produce fruits
they either see or don’t see.

The simultaneous connection of a past fruit with a past, a future and a present cause never
exists.

The simultaneous connection of a present fruit with a future, a past and a present cause never
exists.

The simultaneous connection of a future fruit with a present, a future and a past cause never
exists.

When there is no connection, how can a cause produce fruit? Even when there is connection, how
can a cause produce fruit?

If a cause is empty of fruit, how can it produce fruit? If a cause is not empty of fruit, how
can it produce fruit?

Unempty fruit would not be produced; the unempty would not stop. That unempty is unstoppable
and also unproducable.

How would empty [fruit] be produced? And how would the empty stop? It follows that that empty
too is unstoppable and also unproducable.

It is never possible that cause and fruit are identical. It is never possible that cause and
fruit are other.

If cause and fruit were identical, produce and producer would be identical. If cause and fruit
were other, cause and non-cause would be similar.

If fruit existed essentially, what would a cause produce? If fruit did not exist essentially,
what would a cause produce?

If it were not productive, the cause itself would be impossible. If the cause itself were impossible,
whose would the fruit be?

If whatever is a combination of causes and conditions does not produce itself by itself, how
could it produce fruit?

Therefore, there is no fruit which has been made by combination [or] made by non-combination.
If fruit does not exist, where can a combination of conditions exist?

Investigation of Combination

