It is said that desire, hatred, stupidity arise from conceptuality; they arise in dependence
on the pleasant, the unpleasant and confusion. [they arise in dependence on confusion about
the pleasant and unpleasant]

Whatever arises in dependence upon the pleasant, the unpleasant and confusion, (whatever arises
in dependence on confusion about the pleasant and unpleasant) they have no own-nature,
therefore, afflictions do not really exist (do not exist in themselves).

The existence or non-existence of self is not established in any way. Without that, how can
the existence or non-existence of afflictions be established?

These afflictions are someone’s. But that [someone] is not established. Without [someone], the
afflictions are not anyone’s.

Like [the self apprehended in] the view of one’s own body, the afflictions do not exist in five
ways in the afflicted. Like [the self apprehended in] the view of one’s own body, the
afflicted does not exist in five ways in the afflictions.

If confusion about the pleasant and unpleasant does not exist from its own nature, what afflictions
can depend on confusion about the pleasant and unpleasant?

Colour/shape, sound, taste, tactile sensation, smell and dharmas: these six are conceived as
the basis of desire, hatred and stupidity.

Colour/shape, sound, taste, tactile sensation, smell and dharmas: these are like gandharva-cities
and similar to mirages, dreams.

How can the pleasant and unpleasant occur in those [things] which are like phantoms and similar
to reflections?

Something is called “pleasant” in dependence on the unpleasant. Since that would not exist without
relation to the pleasant, therefore, the pleasant is not tenable.

Something is called “unpleasant” in dependence on the pleasant. Since that would not exist without
relation to the unpleasant, therefore, the unpleasant is not tenable.

If the pleasant does not exist, how can desire exist? If the unpleasant does not exist, how
can hatred exist?

If such an apprehension as “the impermanent is permanent” is confused, since impermanence does
not exist in the empty, how can such an apprehension be confused?

If such an apprehension as “the impermanent is permanent” is confused, how would the apprehension
“there is impermanence in the empty” also not be confused?

[The means] by which one apprehends, the apprehension [itself], the apprehender and the apprehended:
all are completely pacified, therefore there is no apprehending.

If there is neither confused nor right apprehension, who is confused and who is not confused?

Confusions do not occur for those who are [already] confused; confusions do not occur for those
who are not [yet] confused;

confusions do not occur for those who are being confused. For whom do confusions occur? Examine
this by yourself!

If confusions are not born, how can they exist? If confusions are not born, where can there
be someone who has confusion?

Things are not born from themselves, not born from others. If they are also not from self and
others, where can there be someone who has confusion?

If self and purity and permanence and happiness were existent, self and purity and permanence
and happiness would not be confusions.

If self and purity and permanence and happiness were non-existent, selflessness, impurity, impermanence
and anguish would not exist.

Thus by stopping confusion, ignorance will stop. If ignorance is stopped, impulsive acts etc.
will stop.

If the afflictions of some existed by their own nature, how could they be let go of? Who can
let go of what exists by nature?

If the afflictions of some did not exist by their own nature, how could they be let go of? Who
can let go of what does not exist?

Investigation of Error

