If everything were empty, there would be no arising and perishing. From the letting go of and
ceasing of what could one assert nirvana(-ing)?

If everything were not empty, there would be no arising and perishing. From the letting go of
and ceasing of what could one assert nirvana(-ing)?

No letting go, no attainment, no annihilation, no permanence, no cessation, no birth: that is
spoken of as nirvana.

Nirvana is not a thing. Then it would follow that it would have the characteristics of aging
and death. There does not exist any thing that is without aging and death.

If nirvana were a thing, nirvana would be a conditioned phenomenon. There does not exist any
thing anywhere that is not a conditioned phenomenon.

If nirvana were a thing, how would nirvana not be dependent? There does not exists any thing
at all that is not dependent.

If nirvana were not a thing, how could it possibly be nothing? The one for whom nirvana is not
a thing, for him it is not nothing.

If nirvana were nothing, how could nirvana possibly be not dependent? There does not exist any
nothing which is not dependent.

Whatever things come and go are dependent or caused. Not being dependent and not being caused
is taught to be Nirvana.

The teacher taught [it] to be the letting go of arising and perishing. Therefore, it is correct
that nirvana is not a thing or nothing.

If nirvana were both a thing and nothing, it would follow that it would be a thing and nothing.
That is incorrect.

If nirvana were both a thing and nothing, nirvana would not be not-dependent, because it would
depend on those two.

How could nirvana be both a thing and nothing? Nirvana is unconditioned; things and nothings
are conditioned.

How could nirvana exist as both a thing and nothing? Those two do not exist as one. They are
like light and dark.

The presentation of neither a thing nor nothing as nirvana will be established [only] if things
and nothings are established.

If nirvana is neither a thing nor nothing, by who could “neither a thing nor nothing” be perceived?

After the Bhagavan has entered nirvana, one cannot perceive [him? it?] as “existing,” likewise
as “not existing,” nor can one percieve [him? it?] as “both” or “neither”.

Even when the Bhagavan is alive, one cannot perceive [him? it?] as “existing,” likewise as “not
existing,” nor can one percieve [him? it?] as “both” or “neither”.

Samsara does not have the slightest distinction from Nirvana. Nirvana does not have the slightest
distinction from Samsara.

Whatever is the end of Nirvana, that is the end of Samsara. There is not even a very subtle
slight distinction between the two.

Views about who passes beyond, ends etc. and permanence etc. are contingent upon nirvana and
later ends and former ends.

In the emptiness of all things what ends are there? What non-ends are there? What ends and non-ends
are there? What of neither are there?

Is there this? Is there the other? Is there permanence? Is there impermanence? Is there both
permanence and impermanence? Is there neither?

Totally pacifying all referents and totally pacifying fixations is peace. The Buddha nowhere
taught any dharma to anyone.

Investigation of Nirvana

