Passing does not exist without or together with rising. Rising does not exist without or together
with passing.

How can passing exist without rising? Is there death without birth? There is no passing without
rising.

How could passing exist together with rising? Death does not exist at the same time as birth.

How could rising exist without passing? Things are never not impermanent.

How could rising exist together with passing? Birth does not exist at the same time as death.

How can those that are not established either mutually together or not mutually together be
established?

The finished does not rise; the unfinished too does not rise; the finished does not pass; the
unfinished too does not pass.

Rising and passing do not exist without the existence of things. Things do not exist without
the existence of rising and passing.

Rising and passing are not possible for the empty; rising, passing are not possible for the
non-empty also.

Rising and passing cannot possibly be one; rising and passing also cannot possibly be other.

If you think that you can see rising and passing, rising and passing are seen by delusion.

Things are not created from things; things are not created from nothing; nothing is not created
from nothing; nothing is not created from things.

Things are not created from themselves, nor are they created from something else; they are not
created from [both] themselves and something else. How are they created?

If you assert the existence of things, the views of eternalism and annihilationism will follow,
because things are permanent and impermanent.

If you assert the existence of things, eternalism and annihilationism will not be, because the
continuity of the rising and passing of cause -effect is becoming.

If the continuity of the rising and passing of cause-effect is becoming, because what has passed
will not be created again, it will follow that the cause is annihilated.

If things exist essentially, it would be unreasonable [for them] to become nothing. At the time
of nirvana [they] would be annihilated, because the continuity of becoming is totally
pacified.

If the end stops, it is unreasonable for there to be a beginning of becoming. When the end does
not stop, it is unreasonable for there to be a beginning of becoming.

If the beginning is created while the end is stopping, the stopping would be one and the creating
would be another.

If it is also unreasonable for stopping and creating to be together, aren’t the aggregates that
die also those that are created?

Likewise, if the continuity of becoming is not reasonable at any of the three times, how can
there be a continuity of becoming which isnon-existent in the three times?

Investigation of Rising and Passing

