“If all were empty, nothing could come about or perish. It would follow for you that the four
ennobling truths could not exist.

Since the four ennobling truths would not exist, understanding, letting go, cultivating and
realizing would no longer be valid.

“Since they would not exist, the four fruits would also not exist. If the fruits did not exist,
there could be no abiding in the fruits. Experiencing them would also not exist.

“If those eight beings did not exist, the Community would not exist. Since there would be no
ennobling truths, the sublime Dharma could also not exist.

“If the Community and the Dharma did not exist, how could Buddha exist? When you talk of emptiness,
the three Jewels are maligned.

“The existence of actions and fruits, what is not Dharma and what is Dharma, the conventions
of the world: all these too are maligned.”

An explanation for that: since you do not understand the need for emptiness, emptiness, and
the point of emptiness, therefore in that way you malign.

The Dharma taught by Buddhas perfectly relies on two truths: the ambiguous truths of the world
and the truths of the sublime meaning.

Those who do not understand the division into two truths, cannot understand the profound reality
of the Buddha’s teaching.

Without relying on conventions, the sublime meaning cannot be taught. Without understanding
the sublime meaning, one will not attain nirvana.

If their view of emptiness is wrong, those of little intelligence will be hurt. Like handling
a snake in the wrong way, or casting a spell in the wrong way.

Therefore, knowing how difficult it is for the weak to understand the depths of this Dharma,
the heart of the Muni strongly turned away from teaching the Dharma.

Since [those] erroneous consequences do not apply to emptiness, whatever rejections you make
of emptiness do not apply to me.

Those for whom emptiness is possible, for them everything is possible. Those for whom emptiness
is not possible, for them everything is not possible.

You are transferring your own mistakes onto me. This is like mounting a horse but forgetting
about the horse itself.

If you view all things as existing from their own nature, then you would view all things as
not having causes and conditions.

Cause and effect itself, agents, tools and acts, production and cessation, the effects too would
be undermined.

Whatever is contingently related, that is explained as emptiness. That is contingently configured;
it is the central path.

Because there are no things at all, which are not contingently emergent, therefore, there are
no things at all, which are not empty.

If all were not empty, nothing could come about or perish. It would follow for you that the
four ennobling truths could not exist.

If things were not contingently emergent, how could anguish exist? Impermanent things are taught
to be anguish; in their very own nature they do not exist.

If it did exist from its own nature, why would it have an origin? Therefore, for those who undermine
emptiness, it can have no origin.

If anguish existed by its own nature, there could be no cessation. Because its own nature would
be totally present, cessation too would be undermined.

If the path existed by its own nature, cultivation would not be appropriate. If the path is
to be cultivated, your own nature cannot exist.

When anguish, origins and cessation cannot exist, what ceasing of anguish could one seek to
attain by the path?

If non-understanding existed by its very own nature, how could one ever understand? Doesn’t
it abides by nature?

In the same way, your letting go, realizing, cultivating and the four fruits too are as impossible
as understanding.

How can any fruits, which totally hold their own nature and by their own nature are unattained,
be attained?

If the fruits did not exist, there could be no abiding in the fruits. Experiencing them would
also not exist. If those eight beings did not exist, the Community would not exist.

Since there would be no ennobling truths, the sublime Dharma could also not exist. If the Community
and the Dharma did not exist, how could Buddha exist?

It would also follow that your Buddha does not depend on awakening. It would also follow that
your awakening does not depend on Buddha.

For you, someone who by his very nature is not Buddha could not attain awakening however much
he strove in the practice of awakening for the sake of awakening.

No one would ever do what is Dharma and what is not Dharma. What can that which is not empty
do? Inherent nature is inactive.

Even without Dharma and not-Dharma, you would have the fruits. You would not have the fruits
which have arisen from the causes of Dharma and not-Dharma.

If you have the fruits which have arisen from the causes of Dharma and not-Dharma, why are the
fruits which have arisen from the Dharma and not-Dharma not empty?

Whoever undermines emptiness which is contingent emergence also undermines all the conventions
of the world.

If one undermines emptiness, there would be no actions at all and actions without an author
and agents who do not act.

If there were inherent nature, all beings would be unborn and unceasing, would be fixed in place
forever, separated from the variety of situations.

If [things] were not empty, there could be no attainment of what had not been attained, no ending
of anguish and no letting go of all actions and afflictions.

He who sees contingent emergence sees anguish and origins and cessation and the path itself.

Investigation of the Ennobling Truths

