Those views such as “I occurred or did not occur in the past,” the world is permanent, are dependent
on the extreme of before.

Those views such as I will occur or not occur at another time in the future, the world has an
end, are dependent on the extreme of Later.

It is incorrect to say: “I occurred at a time in the past.” Whatever occurred before, that is
not this.

If you think that that became me, then that-which-is-clung-to would be something else. What
is your self apart from that-which-is-clung-to?

Were you [to say] that there exists no self apart from that-which-is-clung-to, if the very that-which-is-clung-to
were the self, your self would be non-existent.

The very that-which-is-clung-to is not the self: it arises and passes away. How can that-which-has-been-clung-to
be the one that clings?

It is not correct for the self to be other than that-which-is-clung-to. If it were other, with
nothing to cling to, then something [i.e. the self] fit to be apprehended would not be
apprehended.

In that way, it is not other than that-which-is-clung-to nor is it that-which-is-clung-to. The
self is not not that-which-is-clung-to, nor can it be ascertained as nothing.

It is incorrect to say: “I did not occur at a time in the past.” Whatever occurred before, this
is not other than that.

If this were other, it would arise even without that. Likewise, that could remain and be born
without dying in that [former life].

Cut off and actions wasted, acts committed by others would be experienced by someone else. Such
would be the consequences.

There is no occurence from what has not occured. In that case faults would follow: the self
would be something made or even though it occured it would be uncaused.

Therefore, “the self occured, did not occur, both or neither:” all those views of the past are
invalid.

“I will occur at another time in the future,” “I will not occur:” all those views are similar
to [those of] the past.

If the divine were human, then there would be something permanent. The divine is utterly unborn,
because there is no birth in permanence.

If the human were other than the divine, then there would be no permanence. If the divine and
the human were different, there could be no continuity [between them].

If one part were divine and one part were human, there would be both permanence and no permanence.
But that is not reasonable.

If both permanence and impermanence were established, you would have to assert non-permanence
and non-impermance as established.

If something came from somewhere and went somewhere, then samsara would be without beginning.
That is not the case.

If there were nothing permanent at all, what thing could be impermanent, permanent and impermanent,
free of both?

If this world had an end, how would the next world come to be? If this world had no end, how
would the next world come to be?

Because the continuity of the aggregates is similar to the light of a lamp, therefore the very
existence or non-existence of an end is unreasonable.

If the former perished and that [future] aggregate did not arise in dependence upon this aggregate,
then this world would have an end.

If the former did not perish and that [future] aggregate did not arise in dependence upon this
aggregate, then this world would not have an end.

If one part had an end and one part did not have an end, the world would be with and without
an end. That too is unreasonable.

How can one part of the one-who-clings perish while one part does not perish? Likewise, that
is unreasonable.

How can one part of that-which-is-clung-to perish while one part does not perish? Likewise,
that is unreasonable.

If both the presence and absence of an end were established, you would have to assert non-presence
and non-absence as established.

And because all things are empty, about what and in whom do views such as that of permanence
spring forth?

I bow down to Gautama, whose kindness holds one close, who revealed the sublime dharma in order
to let go of all views.

Investigation of Views

